---
layout: post
title: "Contribution to IIO"
date: 2024-04-22
description: What we did and, mostly, the problems =]
tags:
 - mac0470
 - kernel
---

Here I will describe a bit my experience and my thoughts on this second task of the discipline: contributing with the IIO subsystem.

## The tutorials

The purpose of the Industrial I/O is to offer support to devices such as analog-to-digital (ADC) or digital-to-analog (DAC) signal converters
by providing device driver implementations. The `The iio_simple_dummy Anatomy` tutorial introduces the structure of a generic device driver using the
toy module `iio_dummy`. I'm not very familiarized with C, so it took me a while to have a deeper understanding of the code per se.

Although this first tutorial is very detailed in explaining the structure of a device driver and its essential functions, I stumbled upon 
[this old blogpost](https://linux.ime.usp.br/~marcelosc/2019/09/Simple-IIO-driver) from Marcelo Schmitt's blog, where he creates a new driver 
and describes step-by-step and in an even more detailed way all this process.

Even if it was not required, I tried doing the `IIO Dummy module Experiment One: Play with iio_dummy` tutorial just to make sure I was understanding everything.
This tutorial is very similar to the `Introduction to kernel build configuration and modules` one in the sense that it just shows how to do some modifications in
the IIO dummy module and how to compile and test these modifications. The only problem I had was related, again, to my `.config` file being rewritten in the Image 
building when I did not pass the `ARCH` and `CROSS_COMPILE` variables in the same command.

## Contributing

Since we were not very sure of our abilities, we decided to first do a codestyle patch, fixing some warnings pointed out by checkpatch on the drivers/iio/adc/ad799x.c driver.
The modifications were:

1. unsigned -> unsigned int;
2. adding a blank line after declaration;
3. changing a symbolic permission to octal (since it's more intelligible).

A lot of work to do in a pair, ufa 🫠

After that, we sent another patch, now regarding drivers/iio/adc/ti-ads131e08.c. In this one, we just implemented the suggestion given by Marcelo to use
`iio_device_claim_direct_scoped` to automatically lock and release the device from direct mode, making handling errors more easily.
